[Music] Welcome to the Making Sense podcast. This is Sam Harris. Today I want to share a clip from the second season of Absolutely Mental, the podcast I've been doing with Ricky Gervais. Many of you will have heard the first season in Hold or in Part, and I think the second season is actually better. We have hit our stride here, I think. The genesis of this podcast is that Ricky and I would have an occasional phone call, and it occurred to me that these conversations were fun enough that we should record them and see what happened. So the podcast itself really is virtually indistinguishable from telephone conversations we were having anyway. Hence the conceit of making it a phone call. Obviously we're aware that we're recording it and it's a podcast, but to a remarkable degree, it really is the kind of conversation we were going to have anyway, which is unusual and a lot of fun. So for many months I've had the pleasure of rolling out of bed on a Saturday morning and getting on a line with Ricky, only to be reminded that with civilization unraveling all around us, he's primarily afraid of spiders. And as you'll hear, he is very good company. So now this is a clip from season two, episode two, and I hope you enjoy it. And if you want to hear the rest of the series, both seasons are available at absolutelymental.com. Hey, how's it going? Good, how are you? I'm good, I'm good. Although I was just anesthetized, which doesn't happen often, and that's an interesting experience. What's the last time you were put out? I don't think I've ever had a general since I was about maybe 10 to have a tooth out. This wasn't a general, you got a general to have a tooth out? Well, we used to. I mean, in the late sixties, it was gas. Whenever you get one of these urchins who are covered with cold dust, you just put them right out to take their teeth out? No, and I'd always wake up crying because I don't know what it was. I assume it was some sort of mix of nitrous oxide. Yeah, that wouldn't be a general, but that would be... Oh, well, no, it was dentist. No, I was unconscious. Yeah, no, I guess so the distinction between a general and what might be called a twilight anesthesia, or anything other than a general is that in a general, you're not breathing under your own power anymore. Oh, really? You're that deep, and there may be gradations that I'm not aware of. I'm not aesthesiologist, but the... Oh, so they really... You could be completely unconscious, but still, it's not a general. It's much lighter anesthesia. Then I've never had a general. But you've never had a proper surgery? No, I had the glorious intervention of a colonoscopy, and so they give you a propofol, which is what Michael Jackson was using recreationally to sleep with his crazy doctor, who wound up killing him, apparently. Is that why you went for it, because it's celebrity endorsement? You said, whatever, do you wear one glove as well? Yes, I wore a sequin glove. Yeah. Anyway, everything's okay, but it's amazing to have the lights turned out that emphatically, it's certainly unlike going to sleep at night. Yeah, so it's deeper than your unconscious sleep in South Eve, and it's deeper than that, is it? Hell, presumably it must be, because I'm pretty sure I would wake up if someone was sticking a camera off course. I saw a man... Yeah, no, you're right. But you're in sleep, don't the body freeze itself, so you can't get injured. So when you're imagining you're fighting and running, you're deadly still, you're frozen, is that true? Yeah, during REM sleep you are, and there's a disorder of REM sleep, where you're basically, you wake up, but you're still frozen, so you can feel like you're... that's the explanation for many kinds of like UFO abduction experiences and other weirdness. Well, that usually ends with a finger up the arse as well, doesn't it? Strange coincidence, it is. It's just not a human finger, a really long green one. That would wake you up. Yeah. I'm pretty sure that would... That would wake you up. Well, I mean, this conversation makes my question seem a bit tame. I was going to ask you, although it's probably in the ballpark, do you know about hypnosis and how it works, if it works, and if it works, how does it work? And I mean, I don't mean the mechanics of doing it. I mean, why does it work? First of all, does it work? Yeah, well, I have a very little direct experience with it, although I do have one experience that I can describe, which was interesting. So I'm from the literature, I can certainly say that it works for some things on some people. I mean, there are people who are... There's a spectrum of hypnotizability and there's a scale, a Stanford scale of hypnotizability that ranks people based on a test. And actually, when I was an undergraduate, I had that test. I was in a psych 101 and they were looking for experimental subjects and they gave some subset of the class this test. I mean, there's literally a scientific scale that's been sort of peer-reviewed and that is a wow. I think it's at least 50 years old, but it's a Stanford... I think it's a Harvard one too, but it's a Stanford scale of hypnotizability that is the standard. And I forget all of the exercises we had to do, but one stands out of my mind and this really proved to me that there was something there because I think I was fairly... I recall being fairly skeptical that there was anything to this. But you're asked to do various things and then one thing I remember being asked to do was to describe the procedure in a second, but you're inducted into the state of hypnosis and you're given various suggestions. So sort of two parts to hypnosis. There's the induction and then the suggestion phase. And one suggestion was kind of an age regression. We were now told we were now nine years old, I think it was. And then given a piece of paper and a pen and asked to write the year, and I remember writing the year in 1976 without any arithmetic in my head. I mean, I just wrote it and then I was asked to sign my name. And without any conscious, I guess there's been unconscious wish to comply with this thing, but at the time it really felt like an automaticity. I signed my name in precisely the bubbly, childlike handwriting that I would have been appropriate to a nine year old. It certainly wasn't appropriate to my 18 year old self. So that regression experience seemed pretty strong to me. And there were like nine other things. I think it was a scale of 10. And I was a nine in terms of hypnotizability. It might have been a scale of well. So is that just to me that you're very weak, willed? So what is the scale to do? So the scale presumably relates to a characteristic. It's not just a random thing. Are they looked into why some people are more easily hypnotized, like a joke in a side? Could it be more complicity? Could it be that you believe it more or that your naive or your cynical or is there more firm characteristics that would suggest you're a one or a 10? I don't actually know. I think there are other things that it's correlated with, like having a fantasy life or having kind of vivid daydreaming. You can really recall what your daydreaming is about. I don't actually know how much is understood about differences in hypnotizability. But the... And would that be a structure of the brain? Would that be a type of brain? If it was that say, I won't hold you to it, but if it was that you have more vivid homilization, is that a type? Is that a brain type that some people have more vivid imaginations than others? Well, I think we could probably get at it from the side of what's happening when people are seem to be successfully hypnotized. And there has been some neuroimaging work on hypnosis. And the place where it's actually where the effect of hypnosis is, I think, at least in dispute, is with pain suppression. I mean, there are people who've undergone surgeries, real surgeries with no anesthetic, but hypnosis. And this has been a test of two for a very long time. But I recently had someone on my podcast who's been working on this in his lab. And yeah, many, many people have undergone surgery under hypnosis. And then people use hypnosis as a adjunct to anesthesia. They'll be given, I'll say, a local when they might have been given more of a twilight anesthesia. And so it's all just a little loss of those. Okay. So that's very interesting. So tell me what happens there. So supposing that works and they're not screaming. Now, are they feeling pain? They're not feeling it at all. So they're not suppressing. They're not going, I don't mind this pain. They're going, it's something's not getting to them. But that's impossible, isn't it? Because isn't paying a literal physical thing of sign ups and isn't it? It seems, I mean, again, I don't think the work here is definitive, because I think this topic is somewhat in ill repute among scientists. I don't think most neuroscientists are seriously considering focusing on hypnosis as a topic. But I mean, the neuroimaging work that's been done that I'm aware of has found that actually hypnosis is blocking the painful stimuli from even registering in sensory cortex. Okay, so okay. So hold on. How is that possible? So they're under hypnosis, whatever that is, right? So they're under, okay, they're hypnotized. Whatever that is, whether it's some sort of compliance or subconscious thing. And literally, the pain isn't getting to the pain receptors or I can't. Well, there can be downward, there can be downward, top down modulation of sensory cortex. So I think probably there's an area in the midline, in the frontal lobes called the anterior cingulate cortex. And that shows up in many different paradigms, but it's definitely involved in pain perception. And it's there are more senior, more executive areas that could inhibit sensory cortex. And yes, I mean, that seems to be what I've seen. I'd still say, if that even if that was working and it was going, well, I still like to think a finger at my ass would bring me out of that. Well, you'll never know until you try. And the talk is a furious. Why did you do that? It was working. Why did you do that? Well, but there's an interesting thing here because it's not clear whether hypnosis is a state, you know, because it's definitely advertised as being a state that gets induced. And it's on the basis of that state that you then become suggestible. But it's possible that the suggestion itself is really the whole story or much of it. For instance, I think there have been experiments done where the exact same induction and suggestion process is happening. But in one paradigm, it's called hypnosis. And in another, it's called a relaxation exercise. And it has a very different effect on people, just the framing of it. I mean, the people thinking they're going to get hypnotized matters as opposed to thinking they're just relaxing. Well, that's why I can't get by. I know it's all about perception, but I still think of pain as a literal objective thing, like, you know, electricity jumping and hurting and you're whether you like it or not, you feel something. And that is what a pain is. But if it's a pain, no, it's not like that. Well, just to. I mean, yes, the pain signal, you know, let's say at your finger, right? It's the same. It has to be the same from the finger on in. But at a certain point, what you're imagining is pure sensation is being modulated by the rest of what the brain is doing, right? And it becomes susceptible to significant influence and even cancellation. And we're in the network of the brain that's happening. I'm not sure. I'm not sure if maybe someone has a good sense of it now, but I'm just not aware of it. But it may still be somewhat mysterious. But this relates to the placebo effect, which is also well demonstrated for pain and for many other things. But it's also not understood. But it's clearly a belief-based process that gets started. That is medically efficacious. I mean, it becomes a challenge to design drugs that beat placebos in many cases because they're so effective. Okay. So even though there is an actual physical act to do with the laws of physics and electricity and all those things, it then becomes how you perceive it in your brain. And it becomes subjective. I suppose that's like, if you put your foot into a boiling hot bath by mistake for a split second, you think it's cold, you think there's something wrong here, and you go, "Oh, and then you go, no, no, no, it's hot." Well, it's just extreme. Yeah. Yeah. You haven't had time to work. Okay. Okay. Okay. I think I understand that. The point to take on here, I think, is that a belief is also a physical act in your brain. It's no less a physical act than you're getting hit with a hammer. Of course. Of course. Like I said, the man is good company. That could have been the name of the podcast, in fact. But we went with the very British, absolutely mental. And if you enjoy both our company, you can find more of it at absolutelymental.com. [Music] [Music]