[Music] Today I'm speaking with David Benatar. David is a professor of philosophy at the University of Cape Town in South Africa. A few books, better never to have been, the harm of coming into existence, and most recently the human predicament, a candid guide to life's biggest questions. And he's a philosopher who many of you have wanted me to speak with. I've been getting emails and tweets about him for quite some time. He is perhaps the most prominent exponent of a philosophy called anti-natalism. And you will hear much more about that in today's episode. [Music] The question for David really is whether or not existence is worth the trouble. And he answers that question with an emphatic "no." And this makes for an interesting conversation. As you'll hear, there are a couple of places where intuitions diverge, and I think you just have to pick which intuition you find most compelling there. But we talk about many interesting things. We talk about the asymmetry between the good and bad things in life, the ethics of existential risk, the difference between starting and [buzzing] and continuing a life. He sees those as very different. Our built-in bias towards existence and how that may confuse us. The relationship between anti-natalism and another position called pro-mortalism. The idea that would be a good thing if we all died in our sleep tonight. The limits and paradoxes of introspection. How viewing your life. [Music] And there are many other topics here. Population ethics is a very rich conversation for those of you who like moral philosophy. And it got me to realize at least one thing that resolves for me at least one of the troubling paradoxes in Derek Parfett's philosophy. So I founded a very valuable conversation, and I hope you do as well. And now I bring you David Benatar. [Music] I'm here with David Benatar. David, thanks for coming on the podcast. Thank you, nice to be with you. So I've been hearing about you for at least a year. I plead unfamiliarity with your books, but people have been emailing me about you. I think they have read some of your articles and some undoubtedly have read your books. But you have been laying out a... [Music] And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I think that you have been a very powerful person. And I suppose in this area of prokary to ethics, those two come together quite well. But I have written about other topics as well. Another book that I wrote is called The Second Sexism, which is about discrimination against men and boys. And then I've written on a range of practical ethical questions. And you're currently a professor of philosophy. That's correct. I think I've done. So let's just jump in because this really is fascinating. You describe your view. I've been asked that question. And I'm quite frankly, I don't know the answer, whether I coined the term or whether I heard it somewhere. I've tried to do some sort of intellectual archaeology to find out whether I did hear it from somewhere else. And I've been unsuccessful. But the idea itself, I think, dates back to much earlier times. When he was even in ancient times, the idea that it would have been better never to have been born. And a more important thing to do is to find out that you have been and that you have been able to have been better never to have been born. So, I think that's a very important thing to do. Just lay out the argument for anti-natalism. Right. So it's not just the view that it's harmful to come into existence, but a further view that it's also wrong to bring beings into existence. And I think there are a range of arguments for this position. Some of them I characterize as philanthropic arguments. The original arguments that I advanced are the philanthropic ones. And those really are concerned about the being that you'll bring into existence. And my view is not only that it's always a harm for that being, but that it's also a very serious harm. And given the seriousness of that harm, I think that it's always going to be a... So, just to revisit a few of those utterances, they blow by and their significance be lost on some of the audience here. So, one of the consequences of your view is that it really is a monstrous crime to have children. At a minimum, it's a colossal act of negligence on the part of people who haven't really thought about these issues clearly enough. And it's kind of analogous on your view to ushering souls into hell because existence is either that bad or... That's correct. Of course, hell comes in degrees. So, as bad as it is, it can always be worse. And so, we need to be careful about that analogy of ushering somebody into hell, but it's a kind of hell. I love this topic, and I think this will be fun to get into the details here and hear some more of your specific arguments. But what has been your experience? That's for sure. A lot of angry people. Fortunately, not too many of those have made direct contact with me. But one does see a lot of hate mail of a certain kind. And a lot of hate comments on the web. But the people who have contacted me tend to be those who have been more sympathetic to my views. And one very kind of common... One distinction to make here is between pessimism of the sort that you're expressing and nihilism. Your view really isn't nihilistic. Do you want to tease those apart? Yeah, you're absolutely right. Many people, I think, mischaracterize the position as a nihilistic position. Nihilism here would be that basically nothing matters, right? In the scheme of things, good and bad are just things we make up, and the universe doesn't care about us, and therefore it doesn't really matter if conscious minds get ground up in some... Inferno, interminably. That's not your view at all. You want to avoid the Inferno, and you want to avoid committing the moral wrong of consigning people to it. That's exactly right. Look, I am a nihilist of some kind. So if you ask me about whether our lives have cosmic meaning, I'm a nihilist about that. I don't think that they do. But I just don't think that it follows from that, that it's okay to inflict suffering on others. I can imagine that people also... There are lots of people who do exactly that. They try to psychologize it. And I think that's exactly the wrong attitude to have. I think one should look at the arguments, examine them on their merits, and see whether they... But I guess that both things could be true. I find the argument is very interesting, and we will definitely get into those. But when I heard about you and your emphasis on this position, I did think that your just experience of the world moment to moment, and that would include your mood and everything else about you that can be brought to bear on experience, and you must be coloring. You're a sense of their veracity or moral import. And I'll tell you about an experience I had, and I'm just wondering if there's anything about it that could be relevant to your case. So I had a friend, not a close friend, but someone who I had met many, many times, and this was a person who would email me periodically, who was suicidal. And he had been suicidal for quite some time at one point. And here's your last chance to talk me out of it. Put that way, it sounds like a kind of macabre and gratuitous appeal for attention. But it was more... he was actually just being scrupulous to not kill himself so impulsively that he would leave everyone in his life feeling like, if only they had known they might have been able to... He really thought he had reasoned himself to a position where suicide was not only acceptable, but was really his best decision. And he had a very philosophical philosopher, but he had a very philosophical cast of mind, and he was quite smart. And I went back and forth with him a little... The experience was one of seeing someone, in my view, mistake his anhedonia, his lack of joy in living moment to moment for a kind of philosophical epiphany. Which is to say, if he felt better, if he was feeling more joy, if he was feeling more of a connection to other people, he would feel... He would have felt that the results... I know your argument is not an argument for suicide, I mean, we'll differentiate anti-natalism from that, but I'm just wondering if you feel that if the character of your experience were significantly better moment to moment, if you feel like this philosophical conviction would just evaporate or become so uninteresting to you that it would sort of evaporate. Well, I don't like to talk about myself. So, I'm probably just not going to answer that question, but I'll make a few observations. And one is that, in order not to make the assumption that somebody who holds the sort of view that I do is thinking about themselves, they may be thinking about themselves as well, but they might be just thinking about everything they see around them in the world. So, just if you think about the amount of suffering that's going on in the world at any moment, you have to be pre-course and callous to not take that seriously. So, you have to be a part of the type of experience that needs to be about one's own attitudes. It might be sort of sensitivity or an expression of what's going on in the world. So, you sort of gave an example that's very self-oriented. And what I'm suggesting is that's not the only possible way of looking at things. It's also possible to arrive at these sorts of views by looking outward and looking and seeing what you see around you. And then of course the other point is that you spoke about him being an Adoné. Yeah. It's hard to know what is normal here or what is an uncolored lens through which to look at these questions. And there may in fact be no uncolored lens. It may just be lenses all the way in. So, let's get into the details of your argument. Run through the asymmetry argument. So, there's actually more than one asymmetry argument, but there isn't kind of axiological asymmetry, I think, between benefits and harms, between the good things and the bad things. And obviously, if we're speaking within a life, the pains that you have, the other harms that you have, these are bad. And the good things that you have, those are good. But if we're considering this scenario in which somebody is going to be brought into existence, we have to compare the outcome in which they do not exist. And in the outcome in which they don't exist, we have to consider the absent harms and the absent benefits. And I think that the absence of the harms is good, even though that person won't exist. Whereas the absence of the good things in that life is not going to be bad. And that's because there's going to be nobody who's going to be deprived of those good things. And so the asymmetry is really between the bad things. Okay, so it strikes me, I kind of want to run through each piece of that again, so that to make sure that I'm not making a mistake here in reasoning. But it strikes me that you're, there's kind of an imbalance here in how you're presenting that. And you could be conjuring the asymmetry in a way. So you're saying, and just point out where I go wrong here, you're saying that the absence of a good life is not going to be a good thing. The absence of a bad life can't be a harm because there's no one who is harmed. There's no person who is deprived of this life. So the absence of goods is not a bad thing. But the absence of a bad life is a good. Here, in my view, you're kind of smuggling the absence of existence in as part of the good. And you're saying that the prevention of harm is a positive good even though there is no one who enjoys this. Well, a lot of people have suggested that I'm doing that. But the point I'm making here is not so much a metaphysical one as a axiological one. It's about an asymmetry in values between the good things and the bad things in life. And one of the reasons why I think, first of all, I think this asymmetry is actually pretty intuitive. And I think large numbers of people would accept it until they see where it leads. But this basic asymmetry, I think, explains some other asymmetries that many people would endorse. So here's an example. The large parts of the universe that are uninhabited, there aren't beings there. Certainly not sentient beings. And if we think about those uninhabited parts of the universe, we're not filled with a nodo. I think we should be filled with remorse for the absent goods that they are there. And if we think about Mars, for example, with a... We think about the absence of, let's say, the Martian wars, just like we have wars on Earth. And we think about the absence of all the suffering there. I think we said that's a pretty good thing. It's pretty good that they don't have that there. That there's nothing like that on Mars. That's an advantage that... Now, I'll grant you that there are many other possible asymmetries here that we should be concerned about. So, for instance, one thing you claim, or at least I think it's implicit in some of your claims, that there's much more suffering or possible suffering than there is possible happiness. Or the depth of it is far greater. And so there's an asymmetry between suffering and happiness that also just swings the balance here. So we'll talk about that. But here I feel like you're running a foul of my intuitions here. And what you just said about the moral significance of canceling possible goods definitely stands in opposition to the work of every philosopher who is working on what is called existential risk. Now, so you can have philosophers like Will McCaskill who will say that the greatest possible wrong would be to do something which put our species on track for self annihilation. And that would be, in large measure, not because of all the suffering that would be caused because if we're annihilated in the right way, it could be completely painless. It would be wrong because it would close the door to all of the untold good. And so, you know, you know, you're not going to be able to do something like that. And so, I think that when we think about human extinction, there's something that clouds people thinking. And that's why the moment you think about the application of this asymmetry to human extinction, all these other intuitions of the kind of bribing come up. That's why the example I gave wasn't about human extinction. It was a piece of some other speed. When we think about human extinction, there are some confounding variables. The one is the mechanism whereby the extinction takes place. So, there's a distinction between whether people sort of die out or whether they're killed off. And so one way in which we could go extinct is through people meeting an untimely end. And so, there's a lot of people who are being killed. But another way is for everybody to die peacefully in their beds and for the human species to have come to an end because there was no more reproduction. And I think a lot of what's going on with people's intuitions is a mixing up of those things. And then I think there's a lot of sentimentality about the human species. I'd like it to be around for a long time. And haven't we discovered and done all sorts of wonderful things and wouldn't be good if that whole trajectory of sun... So, I would like to move away from those to think of the application of the asymmetry to other cases and see hard works. Granted, some people might be confounded. I don't think I am here. In fact, I think there are a few more things to say about just canceling the human career that are relevant here. But before we do, I just want to linger on this... You're accruing a good to non-existent beings on one side of your equation where you're not on the other. Do you not see it that way or you just think it's justified? No, I do see it that way. But I think it's justified. There is this axiologically symmetry. And I think when you do the calculation... ...and the follow from that, the cards are stacked against bringing somebody into existence. But it's not an artificial stacking. It's one that makes eminent sense. I guess it's still not making sense to me. So let's just spend a few more minutes on this. So we have a person who could have existed but doesn't. And undoubtedly there are philosophical problems with thinking about possibility as well. Are there these possible things or are there simply... ...actually things and we're actually just misled by our notion of possibility. But leaving that aside, I might have had a... ...I have two children which already convicts me of monstrous ethical labs on your account, but we'll leave that aside. But I have decided not to have a third child. You'll be happy to know. A third child will not experience anything good or anything bad. And on your account there's no... ...one account of not getting to do all the good things there are to do. But there is a benefit to not suffering all of the inevitable pains of existence. But that benefit doesn't accrue to anyone because no one by this description exists. That's correct. And it's impossible of course if the person doesn't exist for them to enjoy. We're having to compare those two cases. One scenario in which they do exist and one in which they don't. And if we want to know what's better for that potential person, we need to compare the situation in which they do and the situation in which they don't. And we have to compare obviously the scenario in which they don't exist to the one in which they do and make the interest judgments relative to the world in which the person does exist. How would this calculation run for you if existence was on balance more pleasant and wonderful and creative and beautiful so that every person who comes into existence runs a better than even chance of having a life worth living. Still there are many lives that are not worth living and they come up quite frequently. They just don't overwhelm the lives that are worth living. Then how would you think? Well that very phrase of life worth living I think is ambiguous and I think it's ambiguous between a life worth starting and a life worth continuing. And I think one mistake people make is to not see that ambiguity because I think different standards ought to apply to those two cases. So if at a given time there's more good in your life than bad then your life may indeed be worth continuing. I say may indeed be there's some complexities here that we could revisit later. But I think the bar for stock. Let's stick with the starting of life because we'll get on to whether life is worth continuing. Let's just say that we lived in a world where at birth every human being could expect to have a slightly better than even chance. I mean basically they're like the house in a casino playing blackjack right they have whatever it is a 52% chance of winning and winning in this case really is winning right there's no downside to winning. It's just the 52% of people who have good lives on balance really do have good lives on balance anyway you look at them and then you know the 48% of people who don't have negative lives to one or another degree then how would you think about it? Well I think even the lives that are good on balance is going to be plenty of bad. But let's just stipulate that we live in a world that's kind of like a coin toss and if the right side of the coin comes up that is a life on balance however you want to act. There's no downside to the winning whereas when you win in this life lottery that you're speaking about what I want to get clarity on is is there no downside is this a life of unmitigated good or is there some negative as well. And from what you said I was understanding you ought to be saying that there is some bad as well it's just that on balance it's good. I guess I could be. And let's just say that you're right to feel that we've tuned the luck of lucky minds in such a way that that life is really good and pain does not overwhelm pleasure. Okay, see when you say. I am without granting you that distinction because I'm not sure I agree that exists but we'll get there for the purposes of this point in the conversation. I'm talking about coming into existence so you don't exist and I give you the opportunity to exist and if you could if you were one of the lucky ones you would. Find yourself in a circumstance that was well worth your time. Well that I think is a confusion. I grant you that there are many people who say I'm glad I was brought into existence because I think on balance it's better that I'm around I think I'm getting more good than I am getting bad. But I just think that people who hold that for you have not thought carefully enough about what the question is. I think that they because they already exist they bias towards the condition in which they already exist and so what they're actually asking themselves without realizing it. Surely you would grant that if existence were much much better than it is in fact you could imagine a life worth living. What if existence just had no suffering at all in it. It was just one leap from creative height to another and. So I've considered that possibility and I think in that scenario we should be indifferent between coming into existence and not. But I've got to say that that scenario you've imagined is actually pretty hard to imagine in practice. Hard to imagine in a real such life but yes if we imagine if you think about hypothetically a hypothetical life where you come into existence and there's nothing bad about that. Then I would say I've been different between that and I think we should be indifferent between coming into existence and that condition and not coming into existence. That is a novel view that I have never considered. I'm wondering whether to focus there for a moment before going on to capture some of these loose threads. Let's spend a moment on that. If I posit a kind of God-like paradise for all conscious beings. There is nothing wrong in the universe by anything that you can say is wrong. There's a little a-can pain over here. There's a little disf- I will just cancel that by saying no no those are moments where there's more pleasure flooding in there and more even deeper sense of meaning. Even deeper gratification of one's intellectual life and these are beings who are far more competent than you and I are to judge the character of their experience. They've had a billion years to consider the matter and they're still happy to be here. See I think what's dividing us here is the asymmetry because if you think the asymmetry that I'm defending then you'll say well there's nothing bad in that he didn't like that you're speaking about. But there's also nothing bad in the situation of non-existence. The day they... But if you've never existed the absence of those pleasures is going to mean nothing to you. You won't be there, you won't care about it, it doesn't matter that there's not a being that's having those pleasures. So if you think about Adam and Eve and then some third character that could have been there, this is before the fall obviously and you say well is it. I can see that there's nothing bad about it because there's no one to suffer the absence of those pleasures and insights. But again by the same token I'm not convinced that you can make the other move you're making which is to say that there's something good about not having the suffering imposed on you if you don't exist. You can't feel the relief of not being tortured because you don't exist. So I feel like that's the... there's a symmetry there of just non-being. Let's come back to your third possible child. Let's imagine you were thinking about having a third child and you did some genetic tests and you found out that this child that you could have would lead a life that even by your standards is one of great suffering. And say you decide well we're not going to go ahead with this third child, we're not going to have... But the reason is one which is predicated on the existence of the child and therefore the existence of his or her suffering. We're talking here about the absence of a wrong that I'm not committing by bringing this guaranteed to suffer person into existence. Now let's imagine that you're thinking about having the third child and you do the tests and everything's fine and say to turn out like you have the children on. I don't know your children I hope they're doing well as well as can be but let's imagine they're doing well and the third child the probability is that it'll be like that. Let's just say on their worst afternoon. They can complain about the most insubstantial things and you'd be amazed at how much anguish can be provoked by having the television turned off prematurely. Right but let's imagine that this third child would lead a happy life by your standards. Do you have a reason to bring that child into existence? Well let's leave aside all the other reasons that no doubt you've considered. I think that there is this comes down to population ethics and topics that I hope will touch but there is a kind of more is better principle here when you're talking about good lives. These are all fascinating questions and they connect to more or less everything that's fascinating so it's just trying to resist the slide into. I know you draw a clear line of demarcation there I'm not so sure you can and I think this is an additional problem for me here so. How is it not analogous for me to say well I have a child and there was something very very good. [BLANK_AUDIO] You're talking about an existing child. But I declined to do that so now she has her life as it was and was going to be but it could have been otherwise. I think most people's intuitions would be yes and yet on your account I'm wondering if I could say that. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. I think that's a good thing. We'll be talking about a case of an existing child here and I think they're all kinds of other complexities about this case. Whether she had some entitlements to your bestaying this benefit, all kinds of questions are there. You are speaking about an existing child and so I would say that this child is worse off without this benefit having been bestowed. So whether you've wronged her is another question but she's worse off than she would have been if you'd bestowed this benefit. But I don't think that a parallel claim can be Another point of confusion for me here is that you acknowledge a spectrum of experience ranging from the very, very positive to the right side. You say that we should be indifferent between zero and the very, very positive. Whereas we shouldn't be indifferent between zero and the very, very negative. The very, very negative is worse obviously and we should avoid it and we should choose zero every time over the very, very negative. But we should be indifferent to zero over the very, very positive. But I'm not quite sure how that would work in practice. So imagine if we We're sliding down the ramp of a hedonic experience. We start at the very, very positive and life gets worse and worse and worse and worse until it gets truly neutral. And maybe there's other forms of neutral beyond the lights going out. But at least one form of neutral is not having any discernible experience. And then we just keep on sliding and things get a little bit bad and a little bit worse and all of a sudden. See, again, I don't think that it is. And this assignment of zero that you're proposing is something that I've anticipated before. And I've got an analogy to deal with the case. Like, of course, it's an only an analogy. It can't be a like the case that we're speaking about in every respect. And sick gets sick, but he's also got some attribute whereby he recovers quickly from his sickness. And healthy never gets sick. I mean, never, never, ever gets sick. But he lacks the attribute of quick recovery. So if H were to get sick, he wouldn't quickly recover. It'd be a very slow recovery. Now, what I want to say about sick is that that capacity for quick recovery, that that's good and it's good for sick. But the absence of that capacity in the healthy person is not a not a net disadvantage over sick because he never has any need for that. Right. And so I think we should say a similar thing about these scenarios about existing and non-existing and that these absent pleasures. So not all of my intuitions are being conserved here. I mean, I will say here on this point, your view is a special. I'll just say that on the Buddhist account, existence is the problem. And they have this view of rebirth and karma and what's called a wheel of becoming. You know, life after life, you just can't get off this wheel unless you become fully enlightened. Enlightenment consists in no longer. This is obviously a very good reason to doubt that picture of existence scientifically, but the core of the ethical view there and the soteriological view, the view of what it means to be free, is that existence has this intrinsically unsatisfying character. And you know, this is for reasons that we really haven't gone into yet. It's just the fact that everything is impermanent. It wouldn't be bad if no one existed and the fact that people exist in a circumstance that is perfect to frustrate the search for happiness and well-being is the problem. And enlightenment is the act of canceling all of the mental properties. Or the odd metaphysics of reincarnation. Exactly. Yeah. But there are a few other wrinkles here in Buddhism. And one is that it's possible through a really deep engagement in methods like meditation to. And that does make some of the Buddhist view that I just described somewhat paradoxical. I mean, it's not the problem of existence can really go away to a remarkable degree on the Buddhist account. So that's all just a long way of saying that your view is in very good standing with. [silence] [silence] [silence] Why would it be a bad thing for everyone to die tonight, painlessly in their sleep? Let's just picture what this entails. So everyone goes to sleep. None the wiser. They don't know this. Well, I think that those of us who do exist have an interest in continuing to exist. We work in interest in not being annihilated. And the scenario you are presenting is one in which we are annihilated. Why do we have an interest in being reborn tomorrow from the womb of sleep if existence is, as you say, such that bringing people into it is a terrible crime? Well, I think the analogy is not correct. I don't think we are reborn. I mean, we are reborn in a metaphorical sense, but not literally. I think they're all kinds of... I can't see how we have any more interest than a new being would... Again, you have to. [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence] [silence